Practice
The Performanz        J
In  1632  Bernini  carved  two    marble      ßor   ghcse   (fy»*      c    jn    presenting his work to
friend  and  patron,  Cardinal  Scipio
nC 
n 
Bern«
11  s 
sou
rces,  the main point
accounts  of their  making  dwcll especia         * va  riaö°
nS  in                        fl 
aw 
jn    the  marble
Scipionc and his  court. ' While  there  are s                      bust     a                                                              patron
is  the  same: in  the   final  stages    of wor                     In order 
nO            * 
S 
peed — Baldi-
became  evident  across     the   front   °
f 
bloC
k  in 
SCCfC ‘             J        tonishing   three.
Bernini  carved  a  replacemcnt  from                   tni  in 
311   c%                                                              >
r               .         ~                     Bernini                      rnvered  the  second   bust
nucci    says   in  fifteen     nights,  Domen                 D ione, Bernini
with  a  Cloth,  revealing it  only  after  the   pr*> 
e 
ßernini 
’s     virtuosity  in  a  way  that
This  skilfully   orchestrated   surprise                                 [t was  moreover perfeetly attuned
Ktraiahtforwarrl       rnnlarpmrnf         could not  ha'C                    .Itiire?
7  If   these  anecdotes iUustrate  Bcrnini’s
• k  d  work,  the same sources  also have
The  sourccs
rcception
hc 
also   understood  his artistic   process   as  a
sources    we  may thus glean deuils    concernmg
Bernini at Work
As  with  any  artist,  workshop  traditions,  technologic
circumstanccs  playcd  their  part  in  shaping  Bernini s  wor
a
on a '
Pacing  pagc: Bernini, Scipionc Borghese (first version), 1632, detail, buttons, Carrara marblc,
Galleria Borghese, Rome.
his working processcs; 
5 and  thc high dcgrce  </    ■ legation  to  assistants  that  took  place
within Berninis  large  and  busy  enterprhe          hat  Jennifer   Montagu     has  so  aptly
nained ‘thc industry of art’. 
6  Scholars have  al   ■ turned   their   attention    to  what  may
broadly bc  termed   Berninis  ‘theorics’  of   n < ,   iollowing  Rudolf   Preimesberger  ’s
scminal article of 1985, which revised an cai licr  view of the  artist  as   uninterested   in
questions of  thcory. '  Bernini conducted an acaderny  lor tcaching,  in which   he   shared
his artistic prcccpts, as the sourccs rccord , throughout   thc  1630s and  probabJy  beyond. 
8
Whilc I make extensive use of ihese various Strands of   scholarship,  this    chapter   takes
a different path. It cxamincs stories told in letters, diarics and  biographies   of  the   artist,
about how Bernini conducted his work in cultural as well  as   material  and  intellcctual
terms. There is a special emphasis on  busts, 
9   because portraits   gencrally  required  sit-
tings (or  at  least extensive  corrcspondcncc  with  a  distant   patron),   and  so   dialogue
between artist and patron about the  progress of  the  work.  It focuses  on  Bernini ’s bust
of Louis XIV (figs 9ja  b), executcd  on  his  trip  to  France  in   166   ,  because  of   thc
cxceptional wealth of source material  regarding  its production,   above  all  the   almost
daily account of  its making by thc artist ’s chapcronc  and translator  in Paris, Paul Frcart
de Chantelou. 
10
Thc  scholarly  litcraturc  on   Bernini  has  traditionally   tended   to   treat    the    Paris
sojourn  separately  from  the   rcst    of   thc  artist ’s  biography. 
1 1   My  endeavour    here    is,
instead, to look for  common thrcads in the  social characteristics   of Berninis  working
practicc across his carccr. It is truc that thc circumstanccs   under  which     Bernini worked
in Paris wcrc different  from thosc in  Rome and that  thc  sourccs  availablc to  us for   the
two citics arc not equi valent. It is also thc casc   that  Bernini ’s practicc   must  have   varied
from one Commission to anothcr,  depending on  myriad  determining    circumstanccs,
and that thc social conditions of   Bernini ’s  practicc  changcd   and  developed   over  the
course of his long  and  illustrious  carccr.  Yet  through    the   cndless  particularities   of
individual projccts and sourccs, diffcrenccs ofgenre,  and changcs  over  time,  it remains
useful to pursuc thc question of  his practicc  in  overarching   terms   to  sec  what  it too
can yickl.
To open up the study of  Berninis practicc  to a  cultural  analysis, I draw   together   two
avenucs of enquiry  more  usually  kept apart  -   that  of  artistic  production,    and  that  of
art ’s rcccption.To bring them together allows for   a considcration  of  thc  cultural expcc-
tations within which Bernini worked, and how  thcsc  might  havc shaped  thc  objects he
produccd. The  contcxt  of   rcccption,  then,   bccomcs   thc   medium   — in   a   cultural
sense -  out of which Bernini fabricated     his art. 
12  His portraits   took  their  form   through
a dense web of convcntions and  cxpcctations  that  clustcred    and  jostlcd  against  cach
othcr throughout their making, from  inherited Studio  traditions  to  thc  viewing  habits
of  Berninis patronagc milicu, and thc  many intellcctual, social and  cultural  worlds that
adjoined them.  Portraiturc  required  a  particularly  deep   working   of    thc   thrcshold
between making and viewing, as artist and patron camc  together   in sittings throughout
190
